Title: Constructing biologically realistic neuron and network models with GENESIS

This tutorial is aimed at people who are new to or have only
elementary knowledge about the GENESIS-2 simulator, as well as those
who have used GENESIS in the past and would like to learn of new
developments in cortical network modeling with GENESIS.

After a quick overview of the GENESIS project [1], the tutorial
demonstrates methods for single neuron modeling. It then continues
with the use of the GENESIS neural simulator for the efficient
modeling of large networks of biologically realistic neurons. The
tutorial ends with a summary about the recent development of
functionality for modeling spike-timing dependent plasticity in
network models that include realistic neuronal morphology and axonal
conduction delays for the delivery of action potentials.

The tutorial is a guide to the use of the CNS 2014 release of the
Ultimate GENESIS Tutorial Distribution [2]. This is a newly updated
version of a self-paced course on biologically realistic modeling in
general, and creating simulations with GENESIS in particular. This
package contains the full GENESIS 2.3 distribution, as well as recent
patches that will be incorporated into the GENESIS 2.4 release later
this year. It includes materials used by several recent international
courses on neural modeling as well as new cortical network simulation
examples with tutorial documentation. It comes with suggested
exercises for independent study. This tutorial should give you
everything that you need to get started modeling with GENESIS, and to
develop your own simulations starting from these examples.

References

1. Bower JM, Beeman D (1998, 2003) The Book of GENESIS: Exploring
Realistic Neural Models with the General NEural SImulation System,
second edn. Springer-Verlag, New York. (Free internet edition
available at: http://www.genesis-sim.org/GENESIS/bog/bog.html
[www.genesis-sim.org])

2. The "Ultimate GENESIS Tutorial Distribution"
(http://genesis-sim.org/GENESIS/UGTD.html [genesis-sim.org])

