EDITOR: Would it be possible to insert the following text in the financial disclosure field:

5R01NS049288-07, 5R01NS049288-06, 3R01NS049288-06S1, 2R01NS049288-05, 5R01NS049288-04, 5R01NS049288-03 (www.nih.gov)
CREA/07/027 (www.kuleuven.be)
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

EDITOR: Would it be possible for the editors to complete reference 6 ?  This is a reference to the accompanying paper titled 'A Federated Design for a Neurobiological Simulation Engine: The CBI federated software architecture.' which we also submitted to plos one and is now in the production stage but not yet online published.


Dear Dr. Cornelis,

Re: "Python as a Federation Tool for GENESIS 3.0"

Before we can formally accept your manuscript, a few revisions are required to enable us to move it quickly to live publication. Please log in to Editorial Manager to see the requested due date for this task (usually within five days of this request). If you require additional time, there is no penalty for submitting this task late. However, your publication date is dependent on how quickly you submit your revised file(s). If you expect to submit your task more than two weeks after the due date, please contact ONE_Production@plos.org.

- Please remove the footnotes or endnotes and incorporate them into the article text instead.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: Footnotes have been removed from the text.

- Please remove any table or figure insertion instructions from the manuscript. Figures and tables will be placed based on the text mentions in the manuscript.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- Figures must be cited in numerical order in the text of the manuscript.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: The figures are cited in numerical order in the current version of the manuscript.

- Reference 12 seems to be missing a citation.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: It appears fine in the current version of the manuscript.

- Please remove the figures from the manuscript.  They are already uploaded as separate files.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- Please spell out the authors' first names in the manuscript and list them with the surname last.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- Please note that while we accept EPS figures for publication, our system currently requires that figures in EPS format be converted to TIFF before they can be hosted online. This will be done automatically during the production process; however, if you'd like to provide your own TIFF versions, you may re-upload your figures in this format now. Please see our Figure Guidelines for our specific requirements: http://www.plosone.org/static/figureGuidelines.action.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: All figures have been converted to TIFF.

- If you leave the figures in EPS format, please ensure that the fonts are embedded, otherwise we cannot guarantee the published figure will use your intended fonts. For instructions, please see our Figure Guidelines: http://www.plosone.org/static/figureGuidelines.action.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: All figures have been converted to TIFF.

- To ensure figures are numbered properly in the online Editorial Manager, please add the number to the Description field.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- Please remove the funding from the manuscript; it matches what is already entered in the Financial Disclosure field of the online Editorial Manager, which is sufficient.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE, see also comments above.

I sincerely hope I have addressed all pending issues with the manuscript.

Thanks,


Hugo


TO ACCESS YOUR MANUSCRIPT FILES:

1.      Log in to http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/.
2.      From the Author Main Menu page click on "Current Task Assignments."
3.      In the Action Column, click the "Assignment  Files" option to access your manuscript files. If you don't see a small menu, click on the small + (plus) sign to the left of the word "Action" to open the menu of options.

TO UPLOAD AND SUBMIT REVISED MANUSCRIPT FILES

From the center of the "Submit Task" page, click "Upload File." Clearly label your new files in the Description field. If you need to communicate information about your file revisions, please use the editable email field on the Submit Task page to do so.

DO NOT click "Submit Production Task" until you have uploaded all necessary files. Once you submit this task, you will no longer be able to upload files to Editorial Manager. Note: At this stage our system no longer builds a PDF from your newly uploaded files.

THERE IS NO AUTHOR PROOFING. You should therefore consider the corrected files you upload now as equivalent to a production proof. The text you supply at this point will be faithfully represented in your published manuscript exactly as you supply it. This is your last opportunity to correct any errors that are present in your manuscript files. THE CORRESPONDING AUTHOR IS RESPONSIBLE, ON BEHALF OF ALL CO-AUTHORS, FOR THE ACCURACY OF ALL CONTENT, including spelling of author names and affiliations and completeness of funding information. Please check these carefully.

If you have any questions, please contact ONE_Production@plos.org.

Best wishes,
PLoS ONE Production

