
Please find inserted below explicit responses to the concerns of the
production manager:



Dear Dr. Cornelis,

Re: "A Federated Design for a Neurobiological Simulation Engine: The
CBI federated software architecture."

Before we can formally accept your manuscript, a few revisions are
required to enable us to move it quickly to live publication. Please
log in to Editorial Manager to see the requested due date for this
task (usually within five days of this request). If you require
additional time, there is no penalty for submitting this task
late. However, your publication date is dependent on how quickly you
submit your revised file(s). If you expect to submit your task more
than two weeks after the due date, please contact
ONE_Production@plos.org.


- No figures should appear in the manuscript file, but instead only be
uploaded to the Editorial Manager, as you have. Please remove from
manuscript.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- To ensure figures are numbered properly in the online Editorial
Manager, please add the number to the Description field.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- Please spell out the authors' first names in the manuscript and list
them with the surname last.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- The specific contributions of all authors must be recorded in the
online Editorial Manager. Currently the contributions include the
ambiguous initials MR, which do not belong to an author. Please
respond to this email to clarify the role of MR, either by removing
initials or adding author. Note that non-authors may be acknowledged
in the Acknowledgements section of your manuscript. For your
reference, the author contributions in your published article will be
derived from this information, and the current list of contributions
is as follows:
Conceived and designed the experiments: (blank)
Performed the experiments: (blank)
Analyzed the data: (blank)
Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: (blank)
Wrote the manuscript: HC AC
Other: software implementation: HC MR
philosophical discussion: HC AC JB MR

AUTHOR RESPONSE: We accidentally mixed up the contributions of the two
publications we were working on at that time.

The corrected list of contributions is:

Conceived and designed the experiments: (blank)
Performed the experiments: (blank)
Analyzed the data: (blank)
Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: (blank)
Wrote the manuscript: HC AC
philosophical discussion: HC AC JB


- Funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section
or other areas of your text, but must be entered into the online
Editorial Manager in the Financial Disclosure field. Please remove
this text from the manuscript and let us know if you require any
changes to the Financial Disclosure that currently reads: "CREA/07/027
(www.kuleuven.be)
NIH grant 3 R01 NS049288-06S1 (www.nih.gov)
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."

Note: To update this information in Editorial Manager please reply to this e-mail and have PLoS staff make the change


AUTHOR RESPONSE: The funding information has been removed from the
text.  The financial disclosure field should read:

5R01NS049288-07, 5R01NS049288-06, 3R01NS049288-06S1, 2R01NS049288-05, 5R01NS049288-04, 5R01NS049288-03 (www.nih.gov)
CREA/07/027 (www.kuleuven.be)
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.


- Please note that while we accept EPS figures for publication, our system currently requires that figures in EPS format be converted to TIFF before they can be hosted online. This will be done automatically during the production process; however, if you'd like to provide your own TIFF versions, you may re-upload your figures in this format now. Please see our Figure Guidelines for our specific requirements: http://www.plosone.org/static/figureGuidelines.action.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: All figures have been converted to TIFF.

- If you leave the figures in EPS format, please ensure that the fonts are embedded, otherwise we cannot guarantee the published figure will use your intended fonts. For instructions, please see our Figure Guidelines: http://www.plosone.org/static/figureGuidelines.action.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: All figures have been converted to TIFF.

- Please remove any table or figure insertion instructions from the manuscript. Figures and tables will be placed based on the text mentions in the manuscript.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- Please remove the footnotes or endnotes and incorporate them into the article text instead.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- PLoS ONE can publish only three levels of headings. Please ensure that your manuscript has only three heading levels and that each heading level has distinct formatting that is uniform throughout the text.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE.  We have used latex's 'section', 'subsection' and 'subsubsection' commands.

- Only the following should be used as top-level headings; all other subheads should fall under these: Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion (or Results and Discussion), Methods (or Materials and Methods or Analysis), Acknowledgments. Please ensure all headings are used.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE.

We have used for top-level headings:
1 Abstract
2 Introduction
3 Results
4 Discussion
5 Materials and Methods
6 Acknowledgements
7 Figure Captions (which is presumably removed during the final publication process).


- In the References section, please format citations (authors, year, title ...) to match the examples in the "References" section of the Guidelines for Authors (http://www.plosone.org/static/guidelines.action#preparation):
1 Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR (1977) DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 74: 5463-5467.

Note: I checked references 1 through 40, and my suggestions appear below. Please review and correct the remainder of references on your own.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

Also corrected reference 41, 47, 57, 59

- Reference 17 seems it may be missing a comma between author names.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- Please complete reference 28.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: Editor: this is a reference to a manuscript we
submitted together with this manuscript to PLoS ONE and now has been
accepted.  Would it be possible for the editors to complete and insert
the reference for citation [28] in the References for the associated
manuscript, 'Python as a Federation Tool for GENESIS 3.0' ?

- It seems reference 31 is a book chapter. Please format according to following example:
Hansen B (1991) New York City epidemics and history for the public. In: Harden VA, Risse GB, editors. AIDS and the historian. Bethesda: National Institute of Health. pp. 21-28.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- For reference 30, please include access date. For example:
Loker WM (1996) "Campesinos" and the crisis of modernization in Latin America. Jour Pol Ecol 3. Available: http://www.library.arizona.edu/ej/jpe/volume_3/ascii-lokeriso.txt. Accessed 2006 Aug 11.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

- In regards to the "Incidental Terms" heading at end of manuscript, we recommend you define them upon first use in the text.

AUTHOR RESPONSE: DONE

I sincerely hope I have addressed all pending issues with the manuscript.

Thanks,


Hugo


TO ACCESS YOUR MANUSCRIPT FILES:

1.      Log in to http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/.
2.      From the Author Main Menu page click on "Current Task Assignments."
3.      In the Action Column, click the "Assignment  Files" option to access your manuscript files. If you don't see a small menu, click on the small + (plus) sign to the left of the word "Action" to open the menu of options.

TO UPLOAD AND SUBMIT REVISED MANUSCRIPT FILES

From the center of the "Submit Task" page, click "Upload File." Clearly label your new files in the Description field. If you need to communicate information about your file revisions, please use the editable email field on the Submit Task page to do so.

DO NOT click "Submit Production Task" until you have uploaded all necessary files. Once you submit this task, you will no longer be able to upload files to Editorial Manager. Note: At this stage our system no longer builds a PDF from your newly uploaded files.

THERE IS NO AUTHOR PROOFING. You should therefore consider the corrected files you upload now as equivalent to a production proof. The text you supply at this point will be faithfully represented in your published manuscript exactly as you supply it. This is your last opportunity to correct any errors that are present in your manuscript files. THE CORRESPONDING AUTHOR IS RESPONSIBLE, ON BEHALF OF ALL CO-AUTHORS, FOR THE ACCURACY OF ALL CONTENT, including spelling of author names and affiliations and completeness of funding information. Please check these carefully.

If you have any questions, please contact ONE_Production@plos.org.

Best wishes,
PLoS ONE Production
